this video is sponsored by kiwiko but
more on that later
the earth has a mass of about six
septillion
kilograms that's six trillion trillion
kilograms or a six with 24 zeros
after it that's a pretty mind-blowing
fact by itself but to me what's even
cooler is that we as humans even manage
to figure that out
in the first place because it's not like
we can just take an entire planet and
put it on a set of scales
so how did we actually go about
measuring
the weight of the world
so there's a few ways that we can go
about calculating the mass of the earth
i'm going to focus on two today one of
those
is just from some simple geometry and
the other one is
by using gravity if we start with the
first one
just with some simple geometry if we
assume the earth is a
perfect sphere which is not quite true
it's actually an
oblate spheroid which is essentially a
squashed
sphere it bulges at the equator slightly
because it's spinning faster there but
let's not make the mass any more
complicated than it has to be
well like it's hard now if we remember
back to high school geometry if the
earth is a perfect
sphere then it has a volume v equal to
four thirds pi radius of the earth cubed
so the radius of the earth is the
length from the center to the edge of
the earth
then we can get at the mass of the earth
if we know the earth's density the mass
of the earth is then just the density of
earth
times by that volume so the mass of the
earth is the density of
earth times four thirds pi radius of the
earth
cubed simple right except that we don't
know the density of earth and we don't
know the radius of the earth
either so let's think of another way
that we can do this the second way is
with
gravity so in the late 1600s isaac
newton published his equations that he'd
come up with to describe the force
between
two objects due to gravity so he said
this force was equal to the strength of
gravity overall
times by the mass of one object times by
the mass of the other object
all divided by the distance apart
the two objects are squared so we could
use that equation to work out the force
between
you and the earth right now the mass of
one object would be the earth the mass
of the other object would be
your mass and then the distance between
them would be the radius of
the earth of course we then need to know
the force that you're feeling because of
the earth and the force that you feel
is the force of gravity so when you jump
up it's the force that brings
you back down again and as isaac newton
also told us the force
is equal to your mass times by your
acceleration
and your acceleration is the strength of
earth's gravity that we write
little g so these two forces are the
same and what we get is
your mass times by the strength of
earth's gravity
is equal to the strength of gravity
overall the earth's mass
your mass and the radius of earth
squared
we can simplify this equation your mass
turns up on both sides so we can cross
that out
and we can rearrange it for the mass of
the earth which is
equal to the strength of earth's gravity
the radius of the earth squared divided
by
the strength of gravity overall but
again we're kind of in the same
predicament as we were
before because we don't know the radius
of the earth we don't know
the strength of gravity overall and we
don't know the acceleration due to
earth's gravity
either so that's three things that we
need to know to work out the mass of the
earth and at least
that's not the seven things we needed to
know to work out how long the sun had
left to live last time if you haven't
checked out that video yet i will link
it
up here somewhere but if we compare our
first way of calculating the mass of the
earth with geometry and our second way
with gravity
and we realize that we really cannot
escape knowing the radius of the earth
before we can calculate the mass of the
earth
and so if we're going to know how
massive the earth is we first need to
know
how big is the earth so the very first
person to try and measure the size of
the earth that we know of anyway
was erastosthanes in about 200 b
c now any of the writings that
aristothenes made about his measurement
have all unfortunately been lost
to time but historians do have records
from a greek astronomer called cleomedes
who actually wrote a simplified version
for the public
he said if you picture two cities
directly sort of north
south from each other then you can
measure the sun
makes with the ground using the shadow
cast by
essentially a big stick so the
difference in the angle that the sun
casts on those two sticks and the two
different cities
gives you how far around the circle you
are so if there's a seven degrees
difference
in the angle the shadow of the sticks
then you're
seven of 360 degrees around the earth's
circumference
so if you know the distance between
those two cities then you can work out
the entire
circumference of the earth just by
equating those two ratios of seven over
360 degrees and however many miles the
cities are separated by
divided by the circumference of the
earth the circumference of the earth is
then just
two pi times the radius of earth
remember high school geometry
again and so if you can measure the
circumference you can measure
the radius curtis boat actually has a
great video recreating this experiment
and actually cycling about 250
kilometers further north than his mate
that's also measuring the angle of the
sticks
i'll link it in the video description
for you below now aristotle's eventual
measurement for the circumference of the
earth was 252
000 stadia which is about 39 000
kilometers which is only about one
percent
less than sort of the modern day value
that we use for the circumference
of the earth it was pretty good going
and he managed to do that in 200 bc
now as i said earth is not a perfect
sphere it bulges at the equator slightly
and so these measurements of the
circumference and the radius that you
measure
are going to be ever so slightly
different depending on where you are on
the earth's surface because
at the equator the earth is actually 42
kilometers wider
than it is at the polls and we know that
now thanks to the work of gladys west
through the 70s
and 80s she worked with data from
satellites that gave her the
altitude of the satellite above the
earth's surface that she could
completely map the earth's shape she
then came
up with this oblate spheroid model which
she actually um
programmed an ibm computer to model as
well and all of her work
essentially formed the basis for the
global positioning service
gps that we all use today and so because
of that
we now know that the radius of the earth
at least at the equator
is 6378
kilometers or 3963 miles
okay so that's one unknown down but we
still have these other two
unknowns let's start with little g the
acceleration
due to earth's gravity we essentially
need to work out
how fast something will fall to earth
and again
thanks to newton's laws of gravity we
can derive an equation that will let us
work
out what that acceleration would be so
that we have an acceleration
g that is equal to two times the height
that something is dropped from
divided by the time it takes to fall
squared
now we can actually all do this
experiment from home if we just drop an
object from a known height and then we
time how long it takes to fall
it's not the best and most accurate way
of doing things because the height could
vary and then we've got human reaction
times with the stopwatch
but you can do this with your slo-mo
camera on your smartphone
a piece of paper and a pencil or in my
case
i apparently don't have a pencil
anywhere in the house
but i did have a snazzy pastel pink
highlighter
so the reason we use a piece of paper is
because it's a standard right this is an
a4 piece of paper i know exactly that
it's 297 millimeters long and i can
double check that
as well and what i've done is i folded
it in half to make sort of like a little
tower for it and then i'm going to
bounce my pencil and my highlighter
on top like that then what i'm going to
do is i'm going to get my slo-mo camera
and i'm going to record myself
essentially karate chopping the paper
so i can move it out of the way without
disturbing the pencil or the highlighter
on top
and the slo-mo will record at which
exact frame it started to drop
and which exact frame it hit the desk i
don't have a second tripod for this so
i'm just gonna hold it like a little
selfie
slow-mo let's go
that was too much fun so we can see if
we play that video back that it takes
about
30 frames for the highlighter to fall
from the top of the piece of paper
to the desk now my phone says that it
records at 120
frames per second which means that it
took the highlighter about .25 seconds
or a quarter of a second
to fall from the height of the paper
of about 0.297 meters so we plug all
those numbers in
then we find that g equals
2 times 0.29
divided by 0.25 squared
which equals 9.5 meters
per second squared so the accepted like
modern value of the acceleration due to
earth's gravity is 9.8 meters per second
squared
so it's pretty cool that we can get that
close and that accurate you know just
with
our smartphone and a piece of paper at
our desks
you obviously can do it much more
accurately in the lab if you use like
laser light gates to record the exact
moment that something
fell past a specific location and of
course if you have a camera with a much
higher frame per second rate as well
maybe i should have like called the
slo-mo guys to collaborate for this
little tiny bit of the video obviously
back in the day this is not how the
acceleration due to earth's gravity was
measured you know people would drop
things off very tall buildings the
height of which was known
very well and in time how long it took
them to fall this is what
galileo galilei is famous for you know
dropping things off the leaning tower of
pisa to test
gravity of course their experiments were
nowhere near as accurate because they
didn't have
very accurate timing devices you know
smartphones
not invented in galileo's day how it
worked under those conditions i'll never
know
so now we have the radius of the earth
and we have the acceleration due to
earth's gravity but we still
need to know the overall strength of
gravity in the entire universe
so i bet you started thinking well how
in the universe do you go about
measuring
something like that essentially what
you're trying to measure is how much
two objects will attract
each other and so the very first person
to try and do this was
henry cavendish at the end of the 17
1790s
so what cavendish did was he took two
balls or two masses and put them at
opposite ends a very rigid
rod he then suspended that from the
ceiling so that it was sort of isolated
from earth
gravity and that meant that it could
also spin
freely around however it liked
if you left it long enough it would just
be still because there'd be no movements
of air
causing it to move or anything like that
then he got
two bigger masses and put them in the
same room and the idea was that the
smaller masses would be attracted to the
bigger masses and that rod would spin
and to make the rod spin you need torque
just like
torque on a steering wheel so if you can
measure the torque
on the rod from knowing the angle that
it moves as it's attracted
to those bigger masses then you know the
force
that's pulling that rod that force is
the force of gravity
and therefore you can work out how
strong the force of gravity
is so the force the masses feel times by
the length of the rod is equal to the
torsion coefficient of the rod which is
how resistant it is to twisting times by
the angle that the rod moves
this force is equal to newton's force
that we had before
the strength of gravity times by the big
mass mass
the small mass mass divided by how
far apart those two masses are
squared putting all those formulas
together and doing a lot of algebra to
rearrange gives you a nice formula to
work out the strength of gravity
across the whole universe now although
cavendish did
measure this strength of gravity big g
with this experiment
he never actually wrote that term in any
of his
equations instead he expressed it as
another equation
that gave him the density of earth
instead which is what he was interested
in measuring to use
the geometric way of working out the
mass of the earth
instead he found an average density of
the earth of 5.48 grams per centimeter
cube that's about five
times less dense than water which we can
now convert to a value
of g of 6.74 times 10 to the minus
11 meters cubed per kilogram per second
squared
which is actually only one percent
different from the modern value that we
measure in the lab
today which is six point six seven four
zero eight times ten to the minus eleven
meters squared per kilogram per second
squared oh that's a male 4
that most accurate measurement of g was
done using the exact
same setup as cavendish it was done back
in august 2018 by a chinese
research team but also there's lots of
other ways of doing it too which is very
important we have to get independent
ways of measuring g just to check that
there's you know no
inconsistencies and you can do that now
with things like laser called atoms as
well
which give you a very similar result if
one that's not quite as accurate
so now we have all those numbers it's
just a case of plugging them into that
equation we had
before so that the mass of the earth is
9.8
times by 6 378 kilometers and it needs
to be meters so let's times that
by a thousand and square it and then we
divide
all of that by 6.674
times 10 to the minus 11 and we get a
number for the mass
of the earth of 5.95 times 10
to the 24 kilograms or approximately
6 trillion trillion kilograms so there
you have it it was a fairly simple
bit of maths by the end of it you know
to calculate the
answer to a fairly uh heavy problem
of what is the mass of the earth but it
was only possible
because of the huge amount of science
that's gone on
in the past 2 000 years of
history i think what if anything it's
just a really
stark reminder that all of science and
all of research
that's done today in 2020 is done
standing on the shoulders of giants
before we get to the bloopers a big
thank you to this week's video sponsor
kiwiko kiwiko delivers monthly science
and art maker kits
to your door to provide fun and learning
for all ages
they have really hands-on projects
designed to expose kids to different
scientific concepts and are a great
resource for learning at home
each box comes with all the supplies you
will need with detailed
kid-friendly instructions but really
these are perfect for kids of all ages
including
big kids like us i'm making their light
up planetarium tinker kit for ages 9
plus
and sam is making their coin sorting
eureka kit for ages 14 plus and they
are so much fun it was nice just to have
a break from you know all that screen
time that comes with working from home
at the minute which i'm sure
many kids are also noticing now it's
back to virtual school time
i love their kits so much not only was
it nice to have that final finished
product
i feel like simone gears but the science
content in the magazines they sent with
it was extraordinary
look at all this cool astronomy content
i would have loved this as a kid so if
that sounds good to all you little kids
and big kids like us out there then go
to kiwico.com forward slash dr becky
that's d-r-b-e-c-k-y
and you'll get 30 off your first month's
kit
the link is in the description below
thank you kiwiko you just paid a lot of
kids
very very happy eratosthenes
eratosthenes not have pronounced it that
way
eratosthenes eratosthenes eratosthenes
eratosthenes so the very first person
that we
know of anyway that tried to measure the
size of the earth
was eris aeros aristos
[Music]
knees eratosthenes eratosthenes
air tossed a sneeze fold it over so i
can essentially make this little
tower that my pencil or my pastel pink
highlighter
will supposedly balance the on
ah no
why why are you being difficult
i'm difficult i'm difficult this is the
one
this is the one
desk now my phone records at 120 frames
per second
in slow-mo mode slow mo wrong
measuring the mass of the world not yeah
i don't know the radius
i don't know g and i don't know big g
but i'm gonna find it